relicensing blog post (#250)
MDAnalysis/MDAnalysis.github.io: _posts/2022-11-07-relicensing.md

---
layout: post
title: Relicensing MDAnalysis
---

<a href="https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.en.html">
<img src="https://www.gnu.org/graphics/lgplv3-with-text-154x68.png"
title="LGPLv3" alt="LGPLv3 logo" style="float: right"/>
</a>

This blog post outlines MDAnalysis' proposal to change its license
to the [Lesser GNU Public License][LGPL] (LGPL v3+).

A summary of our [reasons for proposing this license
change](#Rationale-for-changing-licenses), alongside upcoming actions
for [community members and library
contributors](#How-will-the-relicensing-process-work?) are provided.

> > ⚠️ **Disclaimer**

Reviewer: Seems a bit over the top, but this entire topic is quite sensitive, the last thing we want is folks thinking this constitutes legal advice.

> The MDAnalysis core team members are not
> lawyers, as such the information provided here __does not, and is not
> intended to, constitute legal advice__. This blog post also does not
> represent MDAnalysis' full legal position on software licensing, it
> purely aims to inform MDAnalysis developers and users on why
> we believe the library should be relicensed.
>
> Further information on open-source software licensing can be found
> from sources such as the [Open Source Initiative][OSI],
> [tl;drLegal][tldr legal] and the [Software Sustainability Insitute][SSI licensing].
>
> Should you have any concerns about licensing, we always strongly
> recommend getting legal advice before making any decisions on how
> licensing changes may affect you.

## Overview

We want to **change the license of MDAnalysis** from the [GNU General

> Public License v2 (or any later versions)][GPLv2] (GPL v2+) to the less

Reviewer 2: Nitpick but  we use GPLv2 in the intro but then use `GPL` interchangeably with `GPLv2` without making it clear that they are the same thing. 

Should we be slightly more explicit?

Reviewer: I suspect it doesn't, but I've updated the text to be clearer where possible.

restrictive [Lesser GNU Lesser Public License v3 (or any later versions)][LGPL]
(LGPL v3+) license. Both are [_open source licenses_][OSI] but it is
our view that the [LGPL][] will give developers more freedom in how
they license any of their own codes that makes use of MDAnalysis.

> As detailed by the [Open Source Definition][OSD], licenses are core to

Reviewer: Using the OSD here to justify our version of the truth.

the definition of open source. "Open source doesn't just mean access
to the source code". The license defines how code can be used, copied,
changed, and incorporated into other code.

**License changes affect how folks interact with the MDAnalysis code
base going forward. We need the agreement of our contributors and

> community members to change from GPL to LGPL.**

Reviewer: Being cautious in wording here, all we want is to get the approval of our devs and the community.

In this post we want to share the motivation, outline the relicensing
process, and invite comments / questions from the community.

## Rationale for license change

### Why not GPL any more?

Since its initial release in 2008, MDAnalysis has grown from a small
Python package used by a handful of enthusiastic graduate students and
postdocs to a mature library that is used by thousands of researchers
in the molecular sciences. The MDAnalysis library was published under
an open source license from the start so that anyone could freely use
it, contribute to it, and build on it. We chose the GNU Public License
(GPL) for this purpose. Thanks to the "copy-left" portion of the GPL,
which requires anyone using MDAnalysis in their own code to also adopt
the GPL for their code, contributors could feel that any time and work
that they donated and invested into MDAnalysis would not end up

> contributing to software under non open-source licensing.

Reviewer: careful wording here, all we can assert is that GPL code will fall under copyleft (beyond fair use)

However, the GPL has also created barriers to adoption of MDAnalysis.

> It has, under our (and many other's) interpretation of the GPL license,

Reviewer: Careful language - our truth may not agree with other's view of the truth (hence the point of the consultation period).

We therefore propose to undergo the process of **relicensing MDAnalysis
under the [Lesser GNU Public License v3 (or any later versions)][LGPL]**.
This open source license fulfills a number of important requirements for us:

1. Downstream codes are able to freely import or link to MDAnalysis
   library components without impacting the license choice of the
   downstream code.
   
2. Downstream codes are able to use and subclass any MDAnalysis components
   under its application programming interface (classes, methods, and
   data objects), without impacting the license choice of the
   downstream code.
   
3. Codes which either copy or extend the MDAnalysis library should
   fall under the copyleft license requirements of the MDAnalysis
   library license.
   
Thus, it is our view that the LGPL gives people the freedom to choose
any license for their own code that *makes use* of the MDAnalysis library
as a whole (namely ``import MDAnalysis`` or subclassing). This includes
closed / commercial licenses (although we encourage the use of open
source licenses). However, one would not be able to just take parts of
the MDAnalysis code and put it into another piece of code unless the

> other code is then *also* licensed under a compatible copyleft license

Reviewer: Wording here of "compatible copyleft license" is also some careful wording since GPLv2 wouldn't be compatible, etc...

(i.e. GPLv3+/LGPLv3+).

We considered other popular licenses but none fulfilled our requirements.

   
## How will the relicensing process work?

As of writing, MDAnalysis has [over 160 contributors][contributors].
All of which have contributed code under the terms of the GPL v2+
license. We also have a large user community which uses the library
for many wonderful scientific applications, including several
downstream libraries.

> Ultimately, the final decision on relicensing [rests with code

Reviewer: Careful wording, we shouldn't assert how this final decision will be made (in the case we need to account for some issues).

time-consuming process of relicensing.

We wish to open this converstation on our [public forums]({% link
index.md %}#participating) (mailing lists, discord, twitter). As legal
matters, such as licensing, can sometimes be sensitive in nature we have
also set up an email address (*licensing@mdanalysis.org*) monitored
solely by the MDAnalysis Core Developers for any private queries which
you may have.

_Note: Whilst the consultation will only last 28 days, we will continue
to engage with conversations on this topic for the entire length of the
relicensing process._

### Contacting contributors (6th December onwards)

After the consultation period, we will contact every code contributor to
the core MDAnalysis library with a request to agree to changing their
contributitions' license from the current "GPL v2 or any later version"
to "LGPL v3 or any later version".

It is important that we hear back from as many contributors as possible.
If you have contributed to MDAnalysis in the past but have since changed
your git-linked contact details, we would kindly ask if you could email
*licensing@mdanalysis.org* to let us know how best to contact you.

> 

Reviewer 2: Are we setting expectations about what may constitute a successful majority?

Reviewer: We very very much need not to, do you interpret this as setting an expectation @hmacdope ?

Reviewer 2: No not at all, just querying because there were no expectations  stated. So if no expectations required goal achieved.

Reviewer: Ok yeah, this is indeed intentional. I very much tried to ensure we don't trap ourselves in some promise we can't fulfill. The conditions for completion of the relicense are nuanced and cannot be laid out until after we've completed things (it's complicated and I won't get into more details here).

Reviewer 2: :+1: :100:

---
layout: post
title: Relicensing MDAnalysis
---

<a href="https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.en.html">
<img src="https://www.gnu.org/graphics/lgplv3-with-text-154x68.png"
title="LGPLv3" alt="LGPLv3 logo" style="float: right"/>
</a>

This blog post outlines MDAnalysis' proposal to change its license
to the [Lesser GNU Public License][LGPL] (LGPL v3+).

A summary of our [reasons for proposing this license
change](#Rationale-for-changing-licenses), alongside upcoming actions
for [community members and library
contributors](#How-will-the-relicensing-process-work?) are provided.

> ⚠️ **Disclaimer**
> The MDAnalysis core team members are not

> > lawyers, as such the information provided here __does not, and is not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> lawyers. As such the information provided here __does not, and is not
```

> intended to, constitute legal advice__. This blog post also does not

> > represent MDAnalysis' full legal position on software licensing, it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> represent MDAnalysis' full legal position on software licensing; it
```

> > purely aims to inform MDAnalysis developers and users on why

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> simply aims to inform MDAnalysis developers and users on why
```

> we believe the library should be relicensed.
>
> Further information on open-source software licensing can be found
> from sources such as the [Open Source Initiative][OSI],
> [tl;drLegal][tldr legal] and the [Software Sustainability Insitute][SSI licensing].
>
> Should you have any concerns about licensing, we always strongly
> recommend getting legal advice before making any decisions on how
> licensing changes may affect you.

## Overview

We want to **change the license of MDAnalysis** from the [GNU General
Public License v2 (or any later versions)][GPLv2] (GPL v2+) to the less
restrictive [Lesser GNU Lesser Public License v3 (or any later versions)][LGPL]
(LGPL v3+) license. Both are [_open source licenses_][OSI] but it is
our view that the [LGPL v3+][LGPL] will give developers more freedom

> in how they license any of their own codes that makes use of MDAnalysis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in how they license any of their own codes that make use of MDAnalysis.
```

As detailed by the [Open Source Definition][OSD], licenses are core to
the definition of open source. "Open source doesn't just mean access
to the source code". The license defines how code can be used, copied,
changed, and incorporated into other code.

> **License changes affect how folks interact with the MDAnalysis code

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**License changes will affect how people interact with the MDAnalysis code
```

base going forward. We need the agreement of our contributors and
community members to change from GPL v2+ to LGPL v3+.**

> In this post we want to share the motivation, outline the relicensing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this post we want to share our motivation, outline the relicensing
```

process, and invite comments / questions from the community.

## Rationale for license change

> ### Why not GPL v2+ any more?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Why is GPL v2+ no longer the best choice?
```

Since its initial release in 2008, MDAnalysis has grown from a small
Python package used by a handful of enthusiastic graduate students and
postdocs to a mature library that is used by thousands of researchers
in the molecular sciences. The MDAnalysis library was published under
an open source license from the start so that anyone could freely use

> it, contribute to it, and build on it. We chose the GNU Public License
> version 2+ for this purpose. Thanks to the "copy-left" portion of the
> GPL v2+, which requires anyone using MDAnalysis in their own code to
> also adopt a compatible version of the GPL for their code, contributors
> could feel that any time and work that they donated and invested into
> MDAnalysis would not end up contributing to software under non
> open-source licensing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
it, contribute to it, and build on it. We chose the GNU Public License
version 2+ (GPL v2+) for this purpose. The GPL v2+ has a "copy-left"
clause that requires anyone using MDAnalysis in their own code to
also adopt a compatible version of the GPL for their code.
This requirement means that contributors
are assured that any time, work, or other contribution that they invested into
MDAnalysis will not end up contributing to software without
open-source licensing.
```

Just cleared up some grammar here.

Reviewer: Ah "other contribution" can't work here, GPL doesn't protect against someone reading some docs or a reply on an issue tracker and suddenly getting some understanding on how a file format works, etc...

Reviewer: Probably the whole sentence needs to be updated tbh.

Reviewer: TODO - to add slightly updated version of this

Reviewer: done in 5db10f8

However, the GPL v2+ has also created barriers to adoption of MDAnalysis.

> It has, under our (and many other's) interpretation of the GPL v2+
> license, prevented developers from making their own code available under
> non-GPL licenses. Ultimately, it is the MDAnalysis core team's view that
> we do not want to dictate how our developers and users should license
> their code, but we also wish to ensure that work on the MDAnalysis
> library remains open and free.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Under many interpretations, this license prevents
developers who use MDAnalysis from making their own code available under
non-GPL licenses. It is the MDAnalysis core team's view that
we *do not* want to dictate how our developers and users should license
their code, but we *do* wish to ensure that work on the MDAnalysis
library remains open and free.
```

Reviewer: TODO - to add slightly updated version of this

Reviewer: removing ensure to "wish that work on the..."

> Doing so would ultimately benefit the MDAnalysis community, increasing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Changing to a less restrictive license would benefit the MDAnalysis community, increasing
```

the number of codes which can use MDAnalysis, and enabling users in
corporate environments to use the library with more certainty. The
reduced licensing complexity also paves the way for our proposed
[MDAKit ecosystem]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2022-08-24-mdakits-intro %}).

### Why now the LGPL v3+?

We therefore propose to undergo the process of **relicensing MDAnalysis
under the [Lesser GNU Public License v3 (or any later versions)][LGPL]**.
This open source license fulfills a number of important requirements for us:

1. Downstream codes are able to freely import or link to MDAnalysis
   library components without impacting the license choice of the
   downstream code.
   
2. Downstream codes are able to use and subclass any MDAnalysis components
   under its application programming interface (classes, methods, and
   data objects), without impacting the license choice of the
   downstream code.
   

> 3. Codes which either copy or extend the MDAnalysis library should

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Codes that either copy or extend the MDAnalysis library should
```

   fall under the copyleft license requirements of the MDAnalysis
   library license.
   
Thus, it is our view that the LGPL v3+ license gives people the freedom
to choose any license for their own code that *makes use* of the MDAnalysis
library as a whole (namely ``import MDAnalysis`` or subclassing). This
includes closed / commercial licenses (although we encourage the use of
open source licenses). However, one would not be able to just take parts of

> the MDAnalysis code and put it into another piece of code unless the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the MDAnalysis code and add it into another codebase unless this
```

other code is then *also* licensed under a compatible copyleft license
(e.g. GPLv3+/LGPLv3+).

> We considered other popular licenses but none fulfilled our requirements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We considered other popular licenses but none fulfilled the requirements listed above.
```

   
## How will the relicensing process work?

> As of writing, MDAnalysis has [over 160 contributors][contributors].
> All of which have contributed code under the terms of the GPL v2+
> license. We also have a large user community which uses the library

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of writing, MDAnalysis has [over 160 contributors][contributors],
all of whom have contributed code under the terms of the GPL v2+
license. We also have a large user community that uses the library
```

for many wonderful scientific applications, including several
downstream libraries.

Ultimately, the final decision on relicensing [rests with code
authors](#Contacting-contributors).  However, we fully recognise that
this is a big change for the MDAnalysis user base and the wider

> molecular sciences community. We are, as always, fully invested in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
molecular sciences community. As always, we are fully invested in
```

ensuring that our actions reflect the needs of our community. We
therefore want to give everyone an opportunity to [ask questions about
or comment on the relicensing effort](#Consultation-period) as part of
this process.

### Consultation period (7th November until 5th December 2022)

> We will start the process with a 28 days open consultation period.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will start the process with an open consultation period lasting 28 days from 7th November to 5th December 2022 (anywhere on earth).
```

I assume we don't be strict wrt timezones.

Reviewer: Honestly if someone posts on the last day that doesn't help much with the conversation. I'd rather not have "anywhere on earth" here, it's not a deadline for them, it's one for us.

> During this period we would like to encourage members of the community,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During this period we encourage members of the community,
```

both developers and users, to comment on and ask questions about the
proposed relicensing efforts. The aim is to ensure that relicensing is
indeed in the interest of the community. We will do our best to account
for any concerns raised before attempting to continue with the long and
time-consuming process of relicensing.

> We wish to open this converstation on our [public forums]({% link

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We wish to open this conversation on our [public forums]({% link
```

> index.md %}#participating) (mailing lists, discord, twitter). As legal

Reviewer 3: Will we be centralising concerns and a summary of discussion so far somewhere? Maybe on a wiki page?

Reviewer: Added.

> matters, such as licensing, can sometimes be sensitive in nature we have

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
matters such as licensing can sometimes be sensitive in nature we have
```

also set up an email address (*licensing@mdanalysis.org*) monitored

> solely by the MDAnalysis Core Developers for any private queries which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
solely by the MDAnalysis Core Developers for any private queries that
```

the MDAnalysis code and add it into another codebase unless this
other code is then *also* licensed under a compatible copyleft license
(e.g. GPLv3+/LGPLv3+).

We considered other popular licenses but none fulfilled the requirements listed above.

   
## How will the relicensing process work?

As of writing, MDAnalysis has [over 160 contributors][contributors],
all of whom have contributed code under the terms of the GPL v2+
license. We also have a large user community that uses the library
for many wonderful scientific applications, including several
downstream libraries.

Ultimately, the final decision on relicensing [rests with code
authors](#Contacting-contributors).  However, we fully recognise that
this is a big change for the MDAnalysis user base and the wider
molecular sciences community. As always, we are fully invested in
ensuring that our actions reflect the needs of our community. We
therefore want to give everyone an opportunity to [ask questions about
or comment on the relicensing effort](#Consultation-period) as part of
this process.

### Consultation period (7th November until 5th December 2022)

> We will start the process with an open consultation period lasting 28 days from 7th November to 5th December 2022 (anywhere on earth).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will start the process with an open consultation period lasting
28 days from 7th November to 5th December 2022.
```

both developers and users, to comment on and ask questions about the
proposed relicensing efforts. The aim is to ensure that relicensing is
indeed in the interest of the community. We will do our best to account
for any concerns raised before attempting to continue with the long and
time-consuming process of relicensing.

We wish to open this conversation on our [public forums]({% link
index.md %}#participating) (mailing lists, discord, twitter). As legal
matters such as licensing can sometimes be sensitive in nature we have
also set up an email address (*licensing@mdanalysis.org*) monitored
solely by the MDAnalysis Core Developers for any private queries that
you may have.

A summary of open discussions and frequently asked questions will be
made available on the [MDAnalysis wiki][faq wiki].

_Note: Whilst the consultation will only last 28 days, we will continue
to engage with conversations on this topic for the entire length of the
relicensing process._

### Contacting contributors (6th December onwards)

After the consultation period, we will contact every code contributor to
the core MDAnalysis library with a request to agree to changing their

> contributitions' license from the current "GPL v2 or any later version"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
contribution's license from the current "GPL v2 or any later version"
```
